For Mr. Moon, a human rights lawyer whose parents fled the North during the Korean War, reconciliation on the divided Korean Peninsula has been a lifelong goal.

He served as chief of staff to Roh Moo-hyun, South Korea’s president from 2003 to 2008, and helped him pursue the “Sunshine Policy” of engaging North Korea with dialogue, humanitarian aid and joint economic projects. Then he watched his late friend’s legacy crumble as the South’s last two presidents, both conservatives, worked with Washington to isolate Pyongyang with sanctions and pressure.

The nation’s progressives have long been skeptical of that hard-line approach, arguing that sanctions alone would never persuade North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons and would increase the risk of war. They looked forward to a new approach when Mr. Moon returned them to power last year.

Unlike conservatives whose overriding concern is the alliance with Washington, “the progressives see peace on the Korean Peninsula, dialogue and reconciliation with the North as their top priority,” said Lee Byong-chul, senior fellow at the Institute for Peace and Cooperation in Seoul.

But Mr. Moon’s election came as Mr. Kim was accelerating his weapons program and building missiles that could reach the United States. Mr. Trump stepped up pressure on the North and escalated tensions with belligerent rhetoric, leaving Mr. Moon increasingly out of step with Washington.

Even as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan echoed Mr. Trump’s tough talk, Mr. Moon repeatedly spoke out against a military strike — in effect, undermining the credibility of Mr. Trump’s threats.

“No one shall take a military action on the Korean Peninsula without South Korean consent,” he said in August, arguing that attacking the North would trigger a catastrophic war in Korea. “We will prevent war whatever it takes.”

Left-wing governments in South Korea have been in conflict with the United States before. Mr. Roh, for example, said the South would no longer be a junior partner in a “lopsided” alliance with Washington and sought to improve relations with China, the nation’s largest trading partner.

But Mr. Moon has proved more pragmatic and politically adroit than Mr. Roh. He quickly decided to keep an American missile-defense battery whose deployment his supporters had vehemently opposed. And he has gone to great lengths to play to Mr. Trump’s ego, repeatedly thanking the American president for his support and crediting his policies for bringing Mr. Kim to the negotiating table.